# Why is Family Central to God's Plan?

The Family unit is one of the most basic building blocks of society. Over the years, the family structure has changed however the importance of it has not. According to Pew Research Center, “Americans overwhelmingly view spending time with family as one of the most important things in their life, far outranking other personal priorities…About three-quarters of U.S. adults (73%) rate spending time with family as one of the most important things to them personally, regardless of how much time they actually devote to it. Nine-in-ten say they view it either as one of the most important things or as very important but not the most important thing. ” [(1)](https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2023/05/26/family-time-is-far-more-important-than-other-aspects-of-life-for-most-americans/)

In regards to the definition of family, commonly the first thought is our blood relations. However in the world that we live in, many family ties are weak or nonexistent when it applies to family by blood. This doesn’t mean that individuals in those circumstances don’t have others that feel like family to them. Family relations can be created through blood or even through acquisition. A researcher from Penn State Pro Wellness offers this incredible insight: “Sure, we can’t choose our “blood” family. In most cases, family interactions are a mix of great and not-so-great experiences. But we can make up for that by choosing our “adopted” family members, a tribe of people who aren’t related to us, but who show support and prove they’re there for us, so we don’t feel lost in times of need.

Indeed, blood isn’t always thicker than water. As someone who spent most of her life away from relatives, I learned that actions speak louder than words (or rather, than blood ties). Over the years I’ve been able to count on the support of people who were unrelated to me, in different countries and through different life stages.” [(2)](https://prowellness.childrens.pennstatehealth.org/why-is-family-important-for-happiness/)

This researcher also touches on why many people see family as such an important aspect of their lives. She talked about the support you feel from them. That is something that research has proven time and time again. According to researchers at the University of Nebraska, “Marriage and family are perhaps society’s oldest and most resilient institutions. From the beginning of human life, people have grouped themselves into families to find emotional, physical, and communal support.” [(3)](https://extensionpubs.unl.edu/publication/g1890/pdf/view/g1890-2008.pdf) 

Patricia A. Thomas, Hui Liu, and Debra Umberson, professors and researchers from several universities across the nation, dove deeper into the support of families. Through their efforts, they concluded, “Prior studies clearly show that stress undermines health and well-being, and strains in relationships with family members are an especially salient type of stress. Social support may provide a resource for coping that dulls the detrimental impact of stressors on well-being, and support may also promote well-being through increased self-esteem, which involves more positive views of oneself. Those receiving support from their family members may feel a greater sense of self-worth, and this enhanced self-esteem may be a psychological resource, encouraging optimism, positive affect, and better mental health.” [(4)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5954612/)

Families are the first and most natural way that individuals gain intimate relationships with others. They are ways that individuals have found support and help throughout their lives. Throughout time, humans have implemented this social construct. Overall, it has been a very important aspect to individual lives. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints has supported this research in many of their teachings and principles. 

In 1995, the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles released a proclamation centered on the family. In it they state, “...the family is central to the Creator’s plan for the eternal destiny of His children.” They go on to say, “The family is ordained of God. Marriage between man and woman is essential to His eternal plan. Children are entitled to birth within the bonds of matrimony, and to be reared by a father and a mother who honor marital vows with complete fidelity.” [(5)](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/scriptures/the-family-a-proclamation-to-the-world/the-family-a-proclamation-to-the-world?lang=eng#p1)

The view from the church adds a new angle in which to view the importance of families. The leaders talk about the importance it is in our Heavenly Father’s plan. Elder Christofferson adds to this by stating, “A family built on the marriage of a man and woman supplies the best setting for God’s plan to thrive—the setting for the birth of children, who come in purity and innocence from God, and the environment for the learning and preparation they will need for a successful mortal life and eternal life in the world to come. A critical mass of families built on such marriages is vital for societies to survive and flourish. That is why communities and nations generally have encouraged and protected marriage and the family as privileged institutions. It has never been just about the love and happiness of adults.” [(6)](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference/2015/04/why-marriage-why-family?lang=eng#title1)

When a child first comes to this earth, they are pure, innocent, and impressionable. Most of what they learn in the early stages of their lives is in the home with their families or with those who raise them. That is why there is so much responsibility on the parents. They have such a significant impact on their children. Elder Hansen explained, “I learned much as I watched them [his parents] teach their children in the most effective way—by example.” He goes on to list many of the lessons he learned from them. In his conclusion, he states, “So crucial in strengthening families is the realization that strong family relationships don’t just happen. It takes time. It takes commitment, it takes prayer, and it takes work. Parents must realize their responsibility and willingly assume it. The joy and happiness that will result is indescribable.” [(7)](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference/1998/04/children-and-the-family?lang=eng#title1) 

The statements made about the responsibility of parents are powerful. However many parents find themselves having a hard time communicating what they want with their children. Teenage years are notorious for being the years children express rebellion. In an attempt to address this issue, Elder Ashton talks about his thoughts on family communication. In his talk, he suggests seven ways for effective family communication. These seven are: a willingness to sacrifice, a willingness to set the stage, a willingness to listen, a willingness to vocalize feelings, a willingness to avoid judgment, a willingness to maintain confidences, and a willingness to practice patience. Upon going into further detail in his address, these seven suggestions become important because they are ways to build the trust that is so necessary in healthy relationships. [(8)](https://www.churchofjesuschrist.org/study/general-conference/1976/04/family-communications?lang=eng#title1)

In conclusion, there are so many reasons out there as to why families are important and why they may be central in God’s plan. The basic response to this is that families are fundamental social units that we have used for so long as ways to teach children, support one another, and build healthy relationships to combat the difficult life that lies before us. We see that there are huge benefits to individuals mentally and emotionally that have this support. We also see that families have a lasting impact on individuals which adds to the responsibility of parents and guardians. Family relations in a large way sculpt people into who they are throughout their life.



